Assessment 2: Critical Review on Health Across the Lifespan
Zixi Li
Faculty of Health, Southern Cross University
NURS5009-2026-T4 The Health Narrative Across the Lifespan
Mrs. Debbie Proctor
October 3, 2026

Critical Reflections on Health Across the Lifespan

Module 3: Adolescent Mental Health and Suicide Risk

Calear et al. (2026) examined multilevel risk and protective factors for self-harm, suicidal ideation and suicide attempts in Australian adolescents. The prospective study with 4,122 students in 134 schools found that mental health difficulties, peer problems, female or gender-diverse status and LGBTQA+ identity were associated with self-harm or suicidal ideation. There were also lower levels of bullying and greater prosocial behaviour were associated with both self-harm and suicidal ideation, but peer problems were associated with suicide attempts. The large Australian cohort and longitudinal methodology was a strength of the study, which investigated risks over a 12-month time frame. It investigated individual, family, social and school influences.

However, these results need to be viewed with caution. Attrition was higher among those adolescents with worse mental health and suicidality and this could have resulted in an underestimation of risk. Also, measures used were primarily adolescent self-report, and this was an observational study so it showed correlation rather than causality. The counterintuitive finding of the prosocial behaviour being inversely associated with attempted suicidality was not significant on univariate analysis and so its association may be a reflection of the 54 interaction model. The study can be used to guide early identification priorities, but cannot demonstrate that implementation of a particular screening or nursing intervention would be effective in reducing suicide attempts. It also provides limited insight into how nurses should respond post-identification.

This article connects with ULO 1 because it shows how health and wellbeing are shaped by psychological, social and environmental factors. It also relates to ULO 3 by promoting the awareness of respectful, inclusive assessment for gender-diverse and LGBTQA+ adolescents, free of prejudice or stereotype. ULO 4 is evident as it considers adolescence as a phase of development, with changing emotional, social and cognitive needs. For nursing practice, this article underscores the importance of non-judgemental communication and holistic psychosocial assessment, including peer interactions, bullying, family support and protection factors.  I would employ structured assessment to facilitate early recognition, but not rely on a checklist alone. Safe planning, referral and follow-up are vital.

Module 4: Neighbourhood Context and Psychological Distress

Learnihan et al. (2026) found the more socially fragmented the neighbourhood, the higher the mean psychological distress score was among Brisbane adults aged 40--65 years. Based on longitudinal HABITAT data linked to the census, and controlling for covariates, male residents in the most socially fragmented decile had a 0.66 point higher score (out of 24) than those in the least decile, whereas the result was not statistically significant for women after controlling for neighbourhood disadvantage.

Precaution needed, since the small difference could be significant for population planning but might be of limited value for individual clinical diagnosis and prediction. The area index measures something related to a neighbourhood but not necessarily individual loneliness or belonging. This is observational data without the possibility of establishing cause and effect; the patient cohort is restricted to residents living in the same seven-year period which could limit generalisability to a mobile population; and the Kessler-6 measures mainly internalising symptoms and may underestimate distressed presentation in men.

The article considers ULO 1: social environments influence health in conjunction with personal factors; ULO 3: experienced distress in a community context rather than a personal failure; and ULO 4: at midlife, balancing the responsibilities of caregiving and work life with local resources. In practice, this article and research encourage nurses to screen for social connection, community capital, and physical barriers in health checks.
I believe that these findings indicate that the living environment of the patient has as much influence over wellbeing as the individual's own strategies. I believe that while site level data cannot replace an individual assessment, having the community context prepares the nurse for a holistic assessment, acting as an advocate for community resources, and person-centred care.

Module 5: Social Media, Hearing Loss and Social Connection

Jayakody et al. (2022) identified the perspectives of Australian older people regarding the development of a Facebook community to promote psychosocial wellbeing of hearing impaired older people. They held a community conversation with 40 people over 60 to gain input into the design and contents of an online community. Most were Facebook users, didn't want to be part of one and favoredphone calls and in-person activities. They identified disadvantage of not using Facebook, not wanting to use Facebook and lack of access to, and confidence with, the internet as well as privacy and usability concerns.

But the results shouldn't be taken as evidence for or against social media's effect on loneliness. They examined opinions about a hypothetical Facebook group but did not create the group or assess loneliness, social isolation or wellbeing outcomes. The 40 people in our study may not be representative of all Australian older people or those with hearing loss, particularly those who already use digital platforms and may be less socially isolated. Group discussions may have led people to "go along" with others and the article has limited information on whether people's views were influenced by age, digital literacy or hearing needs. So the results identify the barriers and preferences but don't prove whether alternative strategies work better.

This article relates to ULO 1 as it separates objective social contact from perceptions of contact and wellbeing. It relates to ULO 3 through a respect for the older person's preferences and independence and treatment with dignity; the participants advised against patronizing 'dazzle' when communicating. It relates to ULO 4 through the characterisation of the influences of hearing loss and ageing on access to communication and social participation. 

For use in nursing the article serves to discourage all internet or digital connection prescriptions. I would inquire into the older person's most accessible and desirable contact forms and take into consideration logistical challenges such as affordable tech support and internet, hearing aids and privacy, safety, competence and confidence to use digital technology. 'Phone calls and local, face-to-face community groups may be more acceptable options to some people.


References

Calear, A. L., Batterham, P. J., Werner-Seidler, A., Maston, K., Torok, M., O'Dea, B., Larsen, M. E., & Christensen, H. (2026). Multilevel risk and protective factors for self-harm, suicidal ideation and suicide attempt in adolescents. Journal of Child Psychology & Psychiatry, 67(5), 609-619. https://doi.org/10.1111/jcpp.70024

Jayakody, D. M. P., Tan, Y. M. E., Livings, I., Costello, L., Flicker, L., & Almeida, O. P. (2022). Australian older adults' views on using social media for reducing social isolation and loneliness in hearing impaired older adults: A community conversation. Australasian Journal on Ageing, 41, 585-589. https://doi.org/10.1111/ajag.13137

Learnihan, V., Bagheri, N., & Turrell, G. (2026). The longitudinal association between living in socially fragmented neighbourhoods and psychological distress among middle aged adults in Brisbane, Australia. Journal of Affective Disorders, 401, Article 121318. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jad.2026.121318

GenAI Acknowledgement Statement

I did not use Generative AI in the preparation of this assessment. I confirm that the content of this critical reflection is entirely my own work, and that no part of it was generated, rewritten, or substantially improved by generative artificial intelligence tools.
